.\" gnump3d man page
.\" 
.\" I'm not too good at writing these files, I'd love a tool
.\" to do it for me..
.\" 
.\" 
.\" .de Id
.\" .ds Dt \\$4
.\" ..
.\" .Id 1.0
.\" .ds = \-\^\-
.\" .de Sp
.\" .if t .sp .3
.\" .if n .sp
.\" ..
.\" .ta 3n
.TH "GNUMP3d" "1" "\*(Dt" "GNU" ""
.SH "NAME"
GNUMP3d \- GNU MP3 / OGG Vorbis Streaming Server
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B gnump3d
.RI [ options ]
.Sp 
.B gnump3d
is a simple server allows you to stream MP3/OGG/Movie files
across a network.

It is designed to be simple, reliable, and extensible \- with the addition of plugins.  

It's user interface may also be changed with the addition of themes.

.SH "OPTIONS"
The following options are supported:

\fB\-\-background\fP
.Sp 
Run in the background after starting the server.

\fB\-\-debug\fP
.Sp 
Run in the foreground, outputting any diagnostics to the console.

\fB\-\-fast\fP
.Sp
Fast startup, don't index the music archive to build a song tag database.

\fB\-\-quiet\fP
.Sp 
Don't display the startup banner when the program starts.

\fB\-\-version\fP
.Sp 
Show the version number of the gnump3d software, then exit.

\fB\-\-help\fP
.Sp 
Display brief usage instructions, then exit.

\fB\-\-lang xx\fP
.Sp
Set the language the server should show it's output in.  ("en" by default).

\fB\-\-plugin\-dir\fP directory
.Sp 
Specify which directory the plugins should be read from.

\fB\-\-theme\-dir\fP directory
.Sp 
Specify which directory the theme files should be read from.

\fB\-\-dump\-plugins\fP
.Sp 
Display all the plugins that the server has found, their versions authors, 
and descriptions.

\fB\-\-port\fP port
.Sp 
Set which port the program should listen upon.

\fB\-\-root\fP directory
.Sp 
Specify the root of your music archive, which is presented to clients.



.SH "AUTHOR Steve Kemp <steve@steve.org.uk>"

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gnump3d.conf (1),
.BR gnump3d\-top (1)
